okay we've got one minute to say happy
birthday to uh
to paul who was 60 yesterday so happy
birthday happy birthday paul
thank you very much yeah happy birthday
paul
happy birthday there's cake left here so
i'm gonna have some afterwards
right well if anyone else joins they can
uh
be let in as we go
can you pop yourself on mute if you're
uh
you know how
that's it right
okay well good afternoon everybody and
uh welcome to
our saturday mataday lecture i've chosen
the subject
for this week of the earth cloud
and i imagine that most people have
heard of the earth cloud
but um i thought it was worth digging
into the history of it a little bit and
the nature of it and what we know what
we don't know
and it goes back
well mostly it goes back to this guy yan
urt who was the first
to propose that the solar system
might have this enormous cloud
of icy material around it
way out in the deep uh parts of
the edge of the solar system and uh he
gave it the name
the earth's cloud or other people
decided to call it after him
because he was uh quite vocal about it
in the 1950s
but the idea goes back a little further
1907 lyncher had the idea that
he was looking at the orbits of a number
of
comets and they were thought to be
on parabolic orbits as in
very long orbits that were open such
that they were
going to pass the sun once and never
come back but he realized that
quite a few of them when you did the
analysis seemed
to be actually very long closed orbits
with periods of millions of years
and then in 1932 ernst opik
from estonia actually
said well it looks like they might have
a common origin
of a cloud of orbiting objects
might well be the source of some of
these long-period comets
but it was very much then taken up 20
years later by januar as we've said
so if we think about comets and we start
to look at
the uh nature of the comets that we see
coming
through the solar system with their
amazing tales
they seem to be able to be grouped into
a number of different
uh categories we we love categorizing
things don't we
so we've got short period comets and
these tend to be in the plane of the
ecliptic that is where the planets orbit
so we tend to find that their the solar
system is basically flat and most of
these short period comets
lie within that same plane
and they have orbital periods ranging
from just a few years
right out to perhaps 100 years or so
and we refer to these all as short
period comets
and we can further subdivide them
into jupiter family comets there seem to
be quite a number
that have periods um
that seem to be related to the orbital
period of jupiter
and their uh farthest distance from the
sun
their half is around about five
astronomical units
five earth sun units uh and that's where
jupiter orbits at 5
a.u so it seems there are quite a few
associated with jupiter
and then there are more that have longer
orbits
such as comet halley which gives its
name to this class the hali-class comets
and that's in a 78-year long orbit
so it carries it out into the outer
solar system
so let's have a look at camp uh comet
halle
it orbits entirely within the the realm
that we associate with the planets of
the solar system
aphelion is 35 astronomical units that's
just beyond the orbit of neptune which
is 30
and perihelion 0.5 au
so that's really quite close to the sun
and the orbit is tilted at just 18
degrees
so this is a rough sort of impression
of halley's comet
and the orbits of the four giant planets
they're
clearly visible so the outer one there
in blue is neptune
then in turquoise we've got uranus
saturn jupiter
and then the inner solar system well you
can just about make out the orbit of
mars
but the rest are all too tightly packed
to see on that diagram
and so it whips around on this highly
elliptical orbit
ranging over those distances but very
much
um still associated with the size and
scale
of the orbits of the planets if we look
at that
from a different perspective you can see
where
the long elliptical orbit goes and we've
got some dates on here
and you can see that actually uh coit
halley
is don't use the mouse pointer roughly
here
it's going to reach its furthest
distance from the sun just in three
years time in 2024
and then be on its return leg again
so it's uh seems only a few years ago
that it was
passing the earth but uh it's
such as the speed with which it whips
through the inner solar system and back
out again
out there it is almost as far away as it
can get
and so that's a halle class comet
seems to be associated with the outer
solar system
and then we have the long period comets
and these have orbital periods that are
considerably longer from
thousands to millions of years
their orbits seem to be random
in the terms of the alignment to that
flat plane of the solar system the
ecliptic
and the picture here is hail bop in
from 1997 which was a typical example
of a long period comet
now what jan urt noted was that there
was a
peak in the number of these long period
comets that had an aphelion a maximum
distance from the sun
at around 20 000 au
so compare that with halle which is 35
a.u
this was the better part of uh 600 times
further out
a huge increase in scale here's another
picture of uh
hale bop from 97 with its dust tail in
white
and the ionized electrically charged
ion tail in blue being deflected away by
the
sun's magnetic field there and its
orbit is thousands of years now you can
see the data the next visit
is going to be 43.85
um aphelion 370 au
so 10 times further away than halle and
a tilt of 89.4 degrees almost at right
angles to the
plane of the solar system so
there's just a rendition of the inner
solar system and hail bop there
you see it had a close approach to mars
there
on the way out
and now it's slowing down as it
disappears out from the solar system
and if you look at it with this plane of
the solar system flat
you can see that trajectory came in over
the top
and then disappeared out almost at right
angles
away from the uh almost from the pole of
the sun
so quite a inclined orbit
so just to put a sense of scale into
things
we're talking about the inner part of
the solar system here on sort of
one and two a u out to mars and the
asteroid belt
five astronomical units out to jupiter
then we can jump scale over here and
plot the outer solar system out to
perhaps
35 astronomical units where
comet halley terminates its orbit
jump out again to the kuiper belt and
the scattered
disc in the orbit of sedna uh where it
takes 11 000 years to go round
um and then jump again
over to this scale here to the
sort of 20 000 astronomical units which
is where some of these comets seem to
come from and that's labeled there as
the inner extent of
the earth cloud
but that earth cloud goes from perhaps a
thousand a year on its very inner edge
out to beyond a hundred thousand au
maybe two thousand to two hundred
thousand
so it's a very very uh distant region
and
uh covers an enormous volume as well
um again here's the inner planets and
this is one of those logarithmic scales
so if earth is one
saturn is 10 um and the edge of the
solar system
as regards the limit where the solar
wind
peters out and the sun's magnetic field
uh becomes
weaker than that of the rest of the
interstellar space
is about 100 au and
as you can see we've got voyager 1
marked on there i think it's at about
120 au
now and then of course a vast expanse
before we get to the beginnings of the
europe cloud
so we think that it surrounds the whole
of the solar system
in a more or less spherical manner so
you've got the inner part of the solar
system in here
with the kuiper belt and neptune and
everything else
in this little box and then this vast
sphere which we've got a cutaway drawing
of
of these icy bodies that are the
progenitors of comets
swarming around in every possible
direction and it's because of that
near spherical symmetry that the comets
can fall in
from any angle when they're on these
very very long trajectories
now the curious thing that we need to
consider though is
that comets don't last forever
comics quite often fade out if they
make multiple passes of the sun
each time they do so material is boiled
off
the nucleus you can see that in action
here
um nucleus embedded in the middle of the
coma there
as the material is boiled away by this
heat from the sun and every time they do
that of course they lose mass
so each time the
comet passes the sun it's going to be
denuded of volatile material until
eventually it runs out
and some comets do go extinct
and we we notice that they are um
just orbiting around they look a bit
more like asteroids at that point and
really
there's not a hard fast
defining line between those two
another way that comets can get wiped
out is
total destruction by collision with a
giant planet
or indeed a not so giant planet but
they're quite likely to
encounter one of the four giant planets
and
crash into it pulled in by its strong
gravity
and of course that's what happened here
to comet schumacher levy 9.
you can see the impact scars there
on the disc of jupiter and this other
picture is the fragmented nature
of the comets that has come too close to
jupiter on the previous pass and been
torn apart into lots of little cometlets
each of which then crashed into jupiter
next time around
but a third way that we can find that
comets
get lost is if they have a near miss
with a giant planet they can get ejected
instead of captured by the giant planet
and eaten
they can get uh slingshot out of the
solar system
actually pick up energy depends whether
they're
traveling with the planet or against it
and whether they're going in front of it
or behind it
as to whether they pick up extra speed
and get slingshot away out of the solar
system perhaps never to come back
or whether they get slowed down and
captured
so they can get lost that way i'm
talking of captured here's one where we
saw it become captured
i think it's quite an interesting event
comet wilde
was on an orbit that is marked in yellow
there
that went beyond the orbit of uranus
and came in and just grazed past the
orbit of jupiter
we call orbits like that centaur orbits
named after the family of objects that
were detected in 1976 onwards
with object cowell and uh it's now
called
chiron uh a number of these centaurs on
these
elliptical black planet crossing
unstable orbits
but comet wild was on a very similar
orbit
came too close to jupiter and became
captured
not into an orbit about jupiter but an
orbit
that uh is one of these jupiter family
comets
so it changed from a centaur like to a
jupiter family
uh comet like orbit with the
uh switch made because it came too close
to jupiter
so the orbits of comets can evolve and
often what we find is they
they undergo a number of these near
misses
and perhaps it'll have another near-miss
with jupiter and then get deflected onto
yet another orbit which could kick it
out of the solar system
or could capture it into orbit around
jupiter
so the question is what's going on here
because
if comets are routinely wiped out
or denuded of material
then the fact that we still see them
with the solar system
being as old as it is means that they
must be being replenished from somewhere
and this is where the idea of the cloud
comes in again but they have been
hanging around out in new york cloud for
many thousands of years many millions of
years
and then something's happened that's
nudged them
into falling in towards the sun and the
inner part of the solar system and
perhaps that was a near-miss with
another oort cloud
object but they they lose speed
fall in towards the sun and a new comet
comes into existence and that this must
be a
fairly regular occurrence to keep us fed
with these comets that
uh get destroyed or um
denuded of material every time they pass
the sun
of course once they are captured onto a
short period orbit
then they pass the sun far more often so
a jupiter family comet passes the sun
every five years
on a close approach so it very rapidly
loses all its volatiles
whereas one honor orbit like halle only
goes anywhere near the sun
um once every 76 years and therefore
doesn't lose as much material over a
period of
say a thousand years
and we think that such a nudge might
have occurred this is the story of
schultz's star
and i love this picture but it's
certainly not true
here's a neolithic man stood
looking up with his spear at this bright
red
object in the sky the idea is that uh
in 2013 shorts's star was discovered
to be one of the sun's near-neighbors at
only 22 light-years from us
and
they worked out that it was moving away
from us and it had been closer in the
past and backtracking the orbits
we realized that it's i
passed by the solar system really quite
closely
so schultz's star is in fact a binary
system
it comprises a red dwarf an m9 type red
dwarf which is about the smallest
red dwarf you can have only 8.6
of the mass of the sun and we think the
lower limit for us red dwarf star
or any type of proper star at all really
is
7.5 percent so at eight point six
percent it's
really on the tiny side of things and
its companion that orbits around it
is even smaller it's six point five
percent
and is a type t5 brown dwarf
so a failed star now
these two orbit around each other point
eight of an astronomical unit apart so
about the distance that venus orbits the
sun
in a four year long dance
um and they're very dim indeed
and that's why i say that picture of the
caveman there's not quite right because
the estimate of the maximum brightness
star is about magnitude 11 and so unless
he had particularly
sharp eyes i know he would have had no
light pollution
he probably wouldn't have been able to
see this and it wouldn't really have
looked like that
artist impression but it's a nice idea
so what we think happened is that 70 000
years ago
it came within uh
52 000 astronomical units
of the sun and that would mean that
it passed through the earth cloud
and in the process it would have
deflected
a whole lot of those cometary
bodies that are out there and so we
should expect quite a wave of uh comets
to be
falling into the inner solar system as a
result of the chaos
caused by this and you might say well
that's not happening but once a comet
has been disturbed out at that distance
it's going to take about 2 million years
before
the resulting comet
falls in from 50 000 astronomical units
down to the me it's meeting with the sun
so
a two million year long trajectory
and this event only happened 70 000
years ago so
it could well be that it's created a
rain of comets
that are all heading into the inner
solar system now
and that could result in a number of
impacts
on earth moon jupiter everywhere
in a couple of million years time of
course
uh you and i will not be around to see
it but
it's quite interesting to see how this
sort of event
could be the forecast of uh some real
quite dangerous situation
so that's a real world example of the
earth cloud being disturbed and
causing a wave of comets to come in
there are other ideas there's a
hypothetical planet
given the name taiki which is supposed
to
be on a long elliptical orbit a sort of
planet nine
but on an orbit that goes out and
crosses through
the earth cloud and brings reins of
comets
every so many million years onto the
inner solar system
um it's probably not true but it's not
really quite possible to rule it out
either the same can be said for this
idea of the nemesis hypothesis which
suggested
that every 27 million years or so
the sun encountered a small red dwarf
star
which was on a very very long elliptical
orbit
that brought it close to the sun and
close enough
to disturb the oort cloud on that sort
of time scale and the
reason that was suggested was because of
an apparent periodicity of about
25 to 27 million years in
the mass extinctions here on earth which
could be the result of
the unleashing of a reign of comets by
such an object
well i don't think there are any
undiscovered red dwarfs in our
neighborhood
we've had a very good look for them and
so i think nemesis probably isn't there
but it wouldn't have to be um
necessarily caused by just one object
there are other reasons why
reigns of comets might occur on a
regular basis
to do with the sun's journey around the
galaxy in fact as it passes in and out
of the spiral arms for example
now i'm just going to say a quick word
about i like the idea of a hill sphere
because you might ask how does the sun
hang on to
all of those cometary objects when
they're so far away
the sun's gravity must be very weak at
that distance
and we can work that out so
the hill sphere of an object is the zone
in which it's itself is the dominant
gravitating force
uh projector so the
sun has a hill sphere around it the
earth does
so even does the moon and we can see
here the earth moon
sun system the big blue
circle here any object lying within this
blue circle around the earth the hill
sphere of the earth
is dominated by the earth's gravity
and not so much uh affected by
that of the sun unless it goes inside
this
darker circle here which is the
hill sphere of the moon with respect to
the earth
so if you get from the earth far enough
towards the moon
into the moon's hill sphere region
then the moon's gravity is going to take
over and control
how you then navigate
another way of looking at the same idea
is
we can look at this diagram which is
like a contour map
of gravity around the earth sun
system uh indeed it would work for any
two bodies
that would produce this sort of effect
so
near the sun you have a roughly circular
spherical region in which the sun's
gravity is dominant
and the effect of the earth is
irrelevant
likewise a much smaller region around
the
uh outside of the uh the earth
and then you have these other points the
lagrange points
l one two three four and five where the
gravity of the two objects
is equal and so neither of them
is going to affect you so you can
actually park at
l1 and the gravity of the sun and the
earth will
be in balance and cancel out
but you can see the these regions here
these are the hill spheres
okay and there's a mathematical formula
for
it and you can plug the numbers in which
we won't worry about for now
but if we plug the numbers in for the
earth and the moon so we put the moon's
mass in there
the earth's mass in here big m
we can work it out and the uh
hill sphere of the earth is 1.5 million
kilometers
and anything that's within a third of
that distance is
really solidly captured by the the main
body
so the moon orbiting around at 0.35
million kilometers or thereabouts is
inside that
thoroughly solidly captured region so
there's no danger
that the moon is going to wander off
in fact if you want to fly to the moon
you have to
think about this sort of thing and the
the
gravity of the the two objects and how
the relative strength of them varies
and the way you uh plot your mission is
to
start off from earth on an elliptical
orbit
fire your engines to send you off
towards the moon
and aim to just arrive at the touching
point of
uh where the uh gravity is equal
and then fire engine again to tip
yourself into
the moon's hill sphere into its sphere
of influence
and just as a bit of fun i worked out
the hill spheres for a few objects
so this astronaut floating outside
the space station here
he's not able to orbit around
the space station the gravity of the
space station itself
its own mass creates a hill sphere
but it's only one meter in diameter
which means it's actually inside the
spacecraft
so you can't get into orbit
um around the spacecraft because
uh you are outside its hill sphere and
inside
that of the earth so you are going to
co-orbit the earth whether you like it
or not in that situation
if you were to fly further away and go
and visit
perhaps on some expensive repair mission
you went out to one of the
communications satellites
in uh the clark belt in the geo
stationary orbit position around the
earth so
35 000 kilometers 22 000 miles
above the surface of the earth you could
as an astronaut
orbit around a large spacecraft you'd
have to be very careful because it
wouldn't take much of a
kick for you to gain escape velocity
from that
rather small gravitational field
of the thing but you're now far enough
away from the earth
that you can create a situation where
you were
in orbit around the satellite
and of course the rosetta mission
met up with comet 67p shown here
and orbited around this comet which is
not a particularly massive object
but it was at about five astronomical
units from the sun
and therefore it was able to get inside
the hills sphere of
the comet which was kilometers
in uh radius uh in fact i think
uh rosetta orbited the nucleus of the
comet
at around 30 kilometers so well inside
that
and of course it also works for
asteroids
this is the door an artist's impression
of the dawn spacecraft
arriving at uh ceres the
largest of the asteroids
a little bit further away from the sun
than we are at 2.8 astronomical units
and so the balance points where ceres
would lose its grip and the sun's
gravity would take over
the hill sphere of series it's 22
sorry 220 000 kilometers so
um dawn had plenty of room for maneuver
with different
sizes of orbits and in fact because it's
still there
and then if we look at neptune uh
because neptune is so
far from the sun and is a fairly
substantial body itself
it's got an absolutely enormous region
around it
it's hill sphere radius is 116 million
kilometers
so that's a vast region of space that
it's dominating
um and of course it's got a family of
moons triton the largest one
is uh like our moon orbits at about
0.3 uh million kilometers so
uh over 300 times inside that
uh region dominated by
neptune there's a sort of chart of
the hill sphere sizes for different um
solar system bodies so we've already
mentioned neptune is in fact the biggest
um series down here is one of the
smaller ones
due to its size but the further away
from the sun you go
you can be the same size and have a
bigger
hill sphere so pluto and the dwarf
planet areas have
much larger hill spheres around them
than we do
because they're so much further from the
sun so the sun's gravity at that
distance
is less of an obstacle to overcome
so in the context of the earth cloud
this is a diagram
of the sun and alpha centauri
the star system next door just uh over
four light years away
and we can work out the with the mass of
the sun being equal to one unit
um we can work out that
one third of the hill sphere is 0.76 of
a
light year so anything in that first
three quarters of a light year
is within the gravitational dominance of
the sun
and that's because the total mass of the
three stars
at alpha centauri is just over double
that
of the sun there's a yellow
g type star with 1.1 solar masses
an orange star at 0.9 solar masses
and the red dwarf proxima centauri at 10
the mass of the sun so if you add all of
that up you find that
that lot to together has a hill sphere
that's about double the size
so anything in this grey region around
alpha centauri
is going to stick with alpha centauri
anything
in this region with the sun is going to
stick with the sun
um unless of course they're zipping
through too
fast or whatever but if they can there
it's perfectly possible to
orbit in this region and the influence
of alpha centauri next door will be
negligible is what we're saying and then
there's a region between the two
where you could be
under the influence of of both and you'd
have to take accounts of
the gravity of both systems um in this
gap between
now you also have to take into account
the uh
this influence of the rest of the galaxy
and you can do that calculation as well
and you find that there's a
region around the sun
that's nearly four light years uh in
size
in which the sun is the dominant object
and even bigger region around alpha
centauri
and so really these two sit in their own
uh combined bubble at the moment
and then fight it out for control
between them as
we've seen that's very interesting
because when we
look at the origin of the cloud
part of it comes from just leftover
material
from the solar nebula out of which the
sun was born
and of course the same process would
have been happening
around other stars
and particularly around the
alpha centauri stars as well so they
presumably also have
earth clouds around them and
in that region between the two stars
no doubt there are bodies that are under
the joint
control of both systems and it would be
hard to distinguish where one or cloud
finished and where the next
began
and we know that uh material does seem
to be exchanged from time to time
between solar systems
about a year ago we saw this object
that came through the solar system and
back out the other side
obviously been formed somewhere else um
and was
zipping through our solar system and so
it may have become ejected from its
parent
system and just now wandering the galaxy
and fell into contact with us but
uh another possible source of that
material
is from further in in the the kuiper
belt region
because of what's being animated here
which is the early days of the
solar system with the giant planets it
starts here with five giant planets
runs the simulation forward and all the
green stuff
is the kuiper belt and at about 20
million years
chaos ensues and there is a complete
rearrangement
one of the giant planets it marked in
red
gets kicked out here coming up
there that elliptical orbit is the fifth
giant planet getting kicked out
some of the other four swap places
and the nicely defined green belt of the
kuiper belt
with millions of objects in it gets
scattered every which way
as you can see there
and some of that material may have been
sent right out into the outer solar
system
to become part of the earth cloud
now we sort talked about these as icy
bodies and
this chap here has made his own comet
out of
frozen carbon dioxide and dirt
which is not a far off uh description
there's quite a lot of these
ices the water methane other
hydrocarbons
ammonia hydrogen cyanide carbon monoxide
all frozen up all these volatile
materials
as well as a certain amount
of rock and dust and gas that's
all mixed in together and so
probably not well not more than two
percent of that
so 98 to 99 percent of the composition
is the volatile substances
but one to two percent is the asteroidal
rocky metal chunks and we think that
some
of the objects in the
cloud are probably mostly rocky but not
very many of them
just uh one percent maybe
from the sizes of the cloud objects
and the comets particularly that we see
coming in
we can try to make an estimate of how
much stuff there is out there
and you can see the table here so small
objects less than a kilometer there are
probably trillions of them
and if you go up in steps of 10 on size
you probably go down in steps about a
thousand
on the number of objects so quite a
sharp drop off
so a few billion objects up to 10
kilometers
in size a few million up to 100
a few thousand up to the size of pluto
and then larger objects less than 10 it
says here so
probably just one or two or something
and the total mass adds up to about five
earth masses
but it's of course scattered out over a
huge volume
now we also think as it says on the last
line there
that quite a lot of the original mass
of the cloud has been either
consumed by the sun
or by the giant planets as a result of
them gobbling up
um in falling comets
over the life of the solar system so
we've probably lost 95 percent of that
mass
of the original earth cloud and thinned
out a lot
we also think that there's probably some
substructure to it and that
there's a sort of inner flat plane
perhaps with a couple of bubbles above
and below
that uh form the inner part of the cloud
and then the main
outer part is just a sphere the reason
we think this is because this is
logically as an extension of the kuiper
belt and the scattered disc
which is flat and there's got to be a
point at which it goes from being flat
to not being flat and being thoroughly
spherical it's likely that that's a
continuous
uh process rather than a sharp cut off
point
and then on the two bubbles but north
and south of the
the sun here those are probably where
some of the material getting scattered
by
encounters with giant planets ends up
into those two bubbles that's
quite likely
but this all remains theoretical
or hypothetical because we've not
detected the
cloud at all yet it's all supposition
this is uh a photograph of comet halley
almost at its uh apelian point
28 astronomical units from the sun and
fading rapidly
because once these objects go out beyond
the ice lines around jupiter
the temperature drops to the point where
they
don't form a tail anymore and so you
very much lose sight of them the tail
makes them so much brighter
when they're in the inner solar system
now that tells us it's going to be
really quite difficult
to detect things like halley's comet
a thousand times further away a thousand
times further away they're going to be a
million times less bright
so it's going to be really quite
difficult given that this is about the
limit
that our telescopes can manage at the
moment
but there is an idea that called the
whipple mission
to not look for the light from these
objects
but to look for the absence of light
when
these objects move in front of
background stars
if we saw the characteristic wink of
a background star we could
work out
uh the mass and the speed of movement or
the size
of the obscuring object whether it was
going to cover the whole of the star or
any part of the starlight
will tell us the size and the speed of
movement
is determines the length of this
miniature eclipse
which we call an occultation
and in fact the kepler space telescope
mission was using that same technique to
look for
repeated transits of exoplanets planets
around other stars
causing a dip in the light curve
and buried in that kepler data there
might already be
detectable occultations
transits if you like of uh
objects from the earth cloud transiting
in front of distant stars
the difficulty might be that they only
do it once
and then it's such a long time before
anything else happens that
we would not be around to see it and so
it's uh quite difficult to infer
that something is definitely a transit
although if you've got high enough
resolution data
then you can work out the shape of the
light curve as the object comes in and
goes out
of the line of sight and that might help
identify some
so we don't know it's there what about
going to look for it
can we send a probe well the
voyager and pioneer probes um
are leaving the solar system as we speak
voyager 1 and 2 were launched in the
1970s
and they've officially crossed out into
interstellar space they crossed the
termination shock
some time ago in fact voyager 1 crossed
that
region the termination shock where the
solar in
wind runs out of momentum against the
pressure of interstellar gas across that
boundary in 94 and is traveling away
from us
at 61 000 kilometers every
hour it's going to take another 300
years to reach the earth cloud though
so that's voyager 1 voyager 2
it's not so far behind it's 123
astronomical units from the sun
moving a little bit slower
at only 55 000 kilometers per hour
and in a completely different direction
as the chart shows
and sadly we're no longer in contact
with the
pioneer probes pioneer 10 and pioneer 11
that also
left the solar system um the last
contact from pioneer 11 was in 1995
and in for pioneer 10 it was the 23rd of
january
2003 so eight years ago
that we lost pioneer 10. now we think
that we'll be able to keep in touch with
the voyagers
for about another 20 years before
they'll be so far away
and they're on board thermo
isotope generating packs will
not be able to generate enough power to
keep them from freezing up
so we'll probably lose them in maybe
maybe 20 or 30 years time
this is where they are they crossed the
termination shock
some time ago they've gone beyond the
helio sheath
and out into interstellar space proper
so they're completely outside the uh
electromagnetic influence of the sun now
the other probe that's on its way out
they're going to tell us useful things
is new horizons that flew past pluto and
then on
past uh ultimate fool the good old uh
arakov 2014 mu69 to give it its
designation
and it's now way beyond that
flying out at very high speed it's not
quite the fastest um it's
slower than voyager 1 but uh it's
traveling at 47 000 kilometers per hour
and it's going to leave the solar system
at quite a high rate
so that will be another potential
way of probing some of what's going on
out there but again
300 years or more before it even reaches
the inner part of the earth cloud
but i like this mission this is the
towel probe
and it was put forward as an idea in
to send a probe out taking 50 years to
travel to a distance of a thousand
astronomical units from the sun and
remain in contact
and the idea was that
they were going to use it to measure the
parallax
of stars we do that
using the baseline of the earth's orbit
so the earth goes around the sun we get
a baseline for our triangles
that's got a side here of 150 million
kilometers
and so we can measure the shape of these
triangles if we can measure this angle
which is the same as this angle which is
the
position that the nearby star appears to
be at
compared to the very much further
distant ones
that's called you the parallax method
and by doing that we can
estimate the distance to at least the
nearby stars really quite well
um but if we had the tau probe sat
a thousand a you away we would
increase our baseline from one
astronomical unit to
a thousand astronomical units and
thereby
make this job a thousand times easier to
do
in other words we could look at stars
that were that much further away
and that would be very useful in terms
of mapping the
nearby star systems but of course
at 1000 au it is more or less
at that inert part of the
earth cloud and it would be very
interesting to see
if such a probe could be launched and
could
return some data but it is going to take
50 years and
that has not been funded as a project
probably because
this 50 years is too long a time frame
for anyone to consider so the
cloud is still in the realms of
hypothetical it's probably out there
it's probably the source of the
long period comets raining down it
probably
gets perturbed now and again by passing
stars like
schultz's star
it's possible that our cloud and that
of alpha centauri are nudging into each
other
and material is getting swapped from one
to the other
and eventually that may come our way so
we won't need to watch out for that
because in most of these things anything
that can happen does happen
and uh yet we've never detected a single
body from it
so it's going to be interesting to see
when
the first discovery of an object in an
orbit
that far away from the sun is made
and we just don't know when that's going
to be
so thanks very much for listening i hope
you've enjoyed
learning a little bit about the cloud
and what we know and what we still don't
know
and i will bring that to a halt just
there